---
layout: paper
title: "A reference based analysis framework for understanding anomaly detection techniques for symbolic sequences"
image: /images/papers/Chandola2014.png
pdf: /pdfs/papers/Chandola2014.pdf
ref: Chandola, Varun et al., 2014
doi: 10.1007/s10618-013-0315-0
authors: Chandola, Varun, Mithal, Varun and Kumar, Vipin
year: 2014
journal: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
---

# Abstract

Anomaly detection for symbolic sequence data is a highly important area of research and is relevant in many application domains. While several techniques have been proposed within different domains, understanding of their relative strengths and weaknesses is limited. The key factor for this is that the nature of sequence data varies significantly across domains, and hence while a technique might perform well in its original domain, its performance is not guaranteed in a different domain. In this paper, we aim at establishing this understanding for a wide variety of anomaly detection techniques for symbolic sequences. We present a comparative evaluation of a large number of anomaly detection techniques on a variety of publicly available as well as artificially generated data sets. Many of these are existing techniques while some are slight variants and/or adaptations of traditional anomaly detection techniques to sequence data. The analysis presented in this paper allows relative comparison of the different anomaly detection techniques and highlights their strengths and weaknesses. We extend the reference based analysis (RBA) framework, which was originally proposed to analyze multivariate categorical data, to analyze symbolic sequence data sets. We visualize the symbolic sequences using the characteristics provided by the RBA framework and use the visualization to understand various aspects of the sequence data. We then use the characterization done by RBA to understand the performance of the different techniques. Using the RBA framework, we propose two anomaly detection techniques for symbolic sequences, which show consistently superior performance over the existing techniques across the different data sets.

---

# BibTex

```bibtex
@article{Chandola2014,
 author="Chandola, Varun and Mithal, Varun and Kumar, Vipin",
 year="2014",
 journal="Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery",
 year="2014",
 volume="28",
 number="3",
 pages="702--735",
}
```
