---
layout: paper
title: "dynamicMF: A Matrix Factorization Approach to Monitor Resource Usage in High Performance Computing Systems"
image: /images/papers/Sorkunlu2018.png
pdf: /pdfs/papers/Sorkunlu2018.pdf
ref: Sorkunlu, Niyazi et al., 2018
doi: 10.1109/BigData.2018.8622425
authors: Sorkunlu, Niyazi, Luong, Duc Thanh Anh and Chandola, Varun
journal: IEEE International Conference on Big Data
---

# Abstract

High performance computing (HPC) facilities consist of a large number of interconnected computing units (or nodes) that execute highly complex scientific simulations to support scientific research. Monitoring such facilities, in real-time, is essential to ensure that the system operates at peak efficiency. Such systems are typically monitored using a variety of measurements and log data which capture the state of the various components within the system at regular intervals of time. As modern HPC systems grow in capacity and complexity, the data produced by current resource monitoring tools at a scale that is no longer feasible to be visually monitored by analysts. We propose a method that transforms the multidimensional output of resource monitoring tools to a low dimensional representation that facilitates the understanding of the behavior of a High Performance Computing (HPC) system. The proposed method automatically extracts the low-dimensional signal in the data which can be used to track the system efficiency and identify performance anomalies. The method models the resource usage data as a three dimensional tensor (capturing resource usage of all compute nodes for different resources over time). A dynamic matrix factorization algorithm, called dynamicMF, is proposed to extract a low-dimensional temporal signal for each node, which is subsequently fed into an anomaly detector. Results on resource usage data show anomalies identified which are correlated with anomalous events identified over the syslog messages.
---

# BibTex

```bibtex
@inproceedings{Sorkunlu2018,
 author="Sorkunlu, Niyazi and Luong, Duc Thanh Anh and Chandola, Varun",
 year="2018",
 booktitle="Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Big Data",
 year="2018",
}
```
